Jinja exceptions (#9586)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/exceptions.md

title: "About exceptions namespace"
sidebar_label: "exceptions"
id: "exceptions"
description: "Raise warnings and errors with the `exceptions` namespace."
---

> The `exceptions` namespace provides callable functions you can use in models and macros to raise warnings or errors during compilation and execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `exceptions` namespace to raise your own warnings or errors from Jinja code in dbt models and macros during compilation and execution.
```

> Use these functions when you want to control how dbt responds to invalid inputs, unsupported features, or dependency problems in your own Jinja code. These are functions you call in your own Jinja code. They are different from syntax errors or undefined variable errors that Jinja may raise automatically when your template has a problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful when your macro or model needs to check for a problem and tell dbt how to respond. For example, you might want to raise a warning or error when:

- a required input is missing
- a value isn't supported
- a dependency isn't available
- a custom validation check fails

These are errors or warnings that you choose to raise in your own Jinja code. They're different from the automatic dbt or Jinja errors, like syntax errors or undefined variables. 
```

> If you are troubleshooting an error message from dbt (not writing Jinja), refer to [Debug errors](/guides/debug-errors).

Reviewer: maybe make it more active
```suggestion
If you're not writing custom Jinja code and are instead trying to fix an error from dbt, refer to [Debug errors](/guides/debug-errors).
```

> When calling these functions during `dbt run` or `dbt run-operation`, wrap them in `{% if execute %}` so they run during the execution phase, not during parsing. Learn more about the [`execute`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) variable.

Reviewer: this is a great nugget to add! 

```suggestion
When calling these functions during `dbt run` or `dbt run-operation`, wrap them in `{% if execute %}` . This makes sure the function runs only when dbt executes your code, rather than when it parses your project.

Learn more about the [`execute`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) variable.
```

> When calling these functions during `dbt run` or `dbt run-operation`, wrap them in `{% if execute %}` so they run during the execution phase, not during parsing. Learn more about the [`execute`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) variable.

Reviewer: one thing to add, since we're telling uses to wrap the functions in `if execute` - we should also update the current examples to follow this ( so the raise_compiler_error and warn examples still don't have it wrapped in that).

we shoudl wrap them in the recommended guidance to be consistent otherwise it could confuse users or they'll end up seeing parsing break rather than just the model.

## raise_compiler_error

The `exceptions.raise_compiler_error` method raises a compilation error with the provided message. This is typically only useful in macros or <Term id="materialization">materializations</Term> when invalid arguments are provided by the calling model. Throwing an exception causes a model to fail, so use this method with care.

> __Example usage__:

Reviewer: this is where we should update teh example to include if execute

title: "About exceptions namespace"
sidebar_label: "exceptions"
id: "exceptions"
description: "Raise warnings and errors with the `exceptions` namespace."
---

Use the `exceptions` namespace to raise your own warnings or errors from Jinja code in dbt models and macros during compilation and execution.

This is useful when your macro or model needs to check for a problem and tell dbt how to respond. For example, you might want to raise a warning or error when:

- a required input is missing
- a value isn't supported
- a dependency isn't available
- a custom validation check fails

These are errors or warnings that you choose to raise in your own Jinja code. They're different from the automatic dbt or Jinja errors, like syntax errors or undefined variables.

If you're not writing custom Jinja code and are instead trying to fix an error from dbt, refer to [Debug errors](/guides/debug-errors).

> When calling these functions during `dbt run` or `dbt run-operation`, wrap them in `{% if execute %}`. This makes sure the function runs only when dbt executes your code, rather than when it parses your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When calling these functions during `dbt run` or `dbt run-operation`, wrap them in `{% if execute %}`. This ensures the function runs only when dbt executes your code, rather than when it parses your project.
```

```sql
{% if execute %}
  {% if number < 0 or number > 100 %}
    {{ exceptions.raise_compiler_error("Invalid `number`. Got: " ~ number) }}
  {% endif %}
{% endif %}
```

</File>

<VersionBlock lastVersion="1.99">

## raise_database_error

Use `exceptions.raise_database_error` to stop a dbt run with a database-style error message from your Jinja code.

This is useful in custom macros when you want dbt to show the error as a `Database Error`. When called, the run fails and dbt displays your custom message.

__Example usage__:

<File name='macros/validate_relation.sql'>

```sql
{% macro validate_relation(relation) %}
  {% if execute and not relation %}
    {{ exceptions.raise_database_error('Expected a valid relation but none was provided') }}
  {% endif %}
{% endmacro %}
```

</File>

## raise_dependency_error

The `exceptions.raise_dependency_error` method raises an error when a package or dependency requirement is not met. To help protect sensitive information, dbt automatically removes secrets from the error message.

The run fails with a `Runtime Error` and your custom message.

__Example usage__:

<File name='macros/check_package.sql'>

```sql
{% macro check_package() %}

>   {% if execute and not 'my_package' in installed_packages %}

Reviewer: sugg the below so it's a bit more idiomatic:
```jinja
{% if execute and 'my_package' not in installed_packages %}
```

__Example usage__:

<File name='exceptions.sql'>

```sql
{% if execute %}
  {% if number < 0 or number > 100 %}
    {{ exceptions.raise_compiler_error("Invalid `number`. Got: " ~ number) }}
  {% endif %}
{% endif %}
```

</File>

## raise_database_error

<VersionBlock firstVersion="2.0">

:::note Not supported in the Fusion engine
`raise_database_error` is available in <Constant name="core" />. It is not currently callable in the <Constant name="fusion" />.
:::

</VersionBlock>

Use `exceptions.raise_database_error` to stop a dbt run with a database-style error message from your Jinja code.

This is useful in custom macros when you want dbt to show the error as a `Database Error`. When called, the run fails and dbt displays your custom message.

__Example usage__:

<File name='macros/validate_relation.sql'>

```sql
{% macro validate_relation(relation) %}
  {% if execute and not relation %}
    {{ exceptions.raise_database_error('Expected a valid relation but none was provided') }}
  {% endif %}
{% endmacro %}
```

</File>

## raise_dependency_error

<VersionBlock firstVersion="2.0">

> :::note Not supported in the Fusion engine

Reviewer: should we just version block the entire section so we dont confuse users ?

Author: Apologies for the late reply @mirnawong1 I only saw this today. Good call — I've wrapped the full `raise_database_error` and `raise_dependency_error` sections in `<VersionBlock lastVersion="1.99">` so Fusion users don't see callable examples for functions they can't use. And removed the standalone Fusion notes since the version block handles it.

</File>

## raise_database_error

> The `exceptions.raise_database_error` method raises a database-style error from Jinja. Use this method in custom macros when you need to fail with an error formatted like a database error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `exceptions.raise_database_error` to stop a dbt run with a database-style error message from your Jinja code.

This is useful in custom macros when you want dbt to show the error as a `Database Error`. When called, the run fails and dbt displays your custom message.

```

> The run fails with a `Database Error` and your custom message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

__Example usage__:

<File name='macros/validate_relation.sql'>

```sql
{% macro validate_relation(relation) %}
  {% if execute and not relation %}
    {{ exceptions.raise_database_error('Expected a valid relation but none was provided') }}
  {% endif %}
{% endmacro %}
```

</File>

## raise_dependency_error

> The `exceptions.raise_dependency_error` method raises an error when a package or dependency requirement is not met. dbt automatically scrubs secrets from the error message.

Reviewer: added a 'why' here
```suggestion
The `exceptions.raise_dependency_error` method raises an error when a package or dependency requirement is not met. To help protect sensitive information, dbt automatically removes secrets from the error message.
```

The run fails with a `Runtime Error` and your custom message.

__Example usage__:

<File name='macros/check_package.sql'>

```sql
{% macro check_package() %}
  {% if execute and not 'my_package' in installed_packages %}
    {{ exceptions.raise_dependency_error('Missing required package: my_package') }}
  {% endif %}
{% endmacro %}
```

</File>

## raise_fail_fast_error

> The `exceptions.raise_fail_fast_error` method raises an error when dbt should halt execution immediately. This is commonly used when configuration changes are detected and `on_configuration_change` is set to `fail`.

Reviewer: active voice
```suggestion
Use `exceptions.raise_fail_fast_error` to stop dbt immediately when it should not continue running.

This is commonly used when dbt detects a configuration change and `on_configuration_change` is set to `fail`.
```

The run fails with a `FailFast Error` and your custom message.

__Example usage__:

<File name='macros/materialized_view.sql'>

```sql
{% if on_configuration_change == 'fail' %}
  {{ exceptions.raise_fail_fast_error(
    "Configuration changes were identified and `on_configuration_change` was set to `fail` for `" ~ target_relation.render() ~ "`"
  ) }}
{% endif %}
```

</File>

## raise_not_implemented

> The `exceptions.raise_not_implemented` method raises an error when a macro or feature is not supported on the current adapter. Adapter and package authors commonly use this method to stub functionality that has not been implemented yet.

Reviewer: what does 'stub' mean here?

> The `exceptions.raise_not_implemented` method raises an error when a macro or feature is not supported on the current adapter. Adapter and package authors commonly use this method to stub functionality that has not been implemented yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `exceptions.raise_not_implemented` to stop a dbt run when a macro or feature isn't supported by the current adapter.

This is often used by adapter and package authors when a feature hasn't been built yet.
```
